GONE FORTH
PABBAJITA SUTTA AṄGUTTARA NIKĀYA 10:59

'Therefore, monks, you should train yourselves, 'Our mind will be strengthened in keeping with the Going Forth, and we will not remain with our mind overcome by any arisen unskillful qualities.

'Our mind will be strengthened with the perception of inconstancy.

'Our mind will be strengthened with the perception of not-self.

'Our mind will be strengthened with the perception of unattractiveness.

'Our mind will be strengthened with the perception of drawbacks.

'Having known the in-tune and out-of-tune of the world, our mind will be strengthened with that perception.

'Having known the coming into being and non-becoming of the world, our mind will be strengthened with that perception.

'Having known the origination and passing away of the world, our mind will be strengthened with that perception.

'Our mind will be strengthened with the perception of abandoning.

'Our mind will be strengthened with the perception of dispassion.

'Our mind will be strengthened with the perception of cessation.'

'That is how you should train yourselves.

'When the mind of a monk is strengthened in keeping with the Going Forth, and doesn't remain overcome by any arisen unskillful qualities,

when his mind is strengthened with the perception of inconstancy,

when his mind is strengthened with the perception of not-self,

when his mind is strengthened with the perception of unattractiveness,

when his mind is strengthened with the perception of drawbacks,

when, having known the in-tune and out-of-tune of the world, his mind is strengthened with that perception,

when, having known the coming into being and non-becoming of the world, his mind is strengthened with that perception,

when, having known the origination and passing away of the world, his mind is strengthened with that perception,

when his mind is strengthened with the perception of abandoning,

when his mind is strengthened with the perception of dispassion,

when his mind is strengthened with the perception of cessation,

then one of two fruits can be expected for him: either gnosis right here & now, or—if there be any remnant of clinging-sustenance—non-return.'