TO SIRIVAḌḌHA
SIRIVAḌḌHA SUTTA  SAṀYUTTA NIKĀYA 47:29

I have heard that on one occasion Venerable Ānanda was staying near Rājagaha in the Bamboo Forest, the Squirrels' Sanctuary. And on that occasion Sirivaḍḍha the householder was diseased, in pain, severely ill. Then Sirivaḍḍha the householder said to one of his men, 'Come, my good man. Go to Venerable Ānanda and, on arrival, pay homage to his feet with your head in my name and say 'Venerable sir, Sirivaḍḍha the householder is diseased, in pain, severely ill. He pays homage with his head to your feet.' Then say: 'It would be good if Venerable Ānanda would visit Sirivaḍḍha's home, out of sympathy for him.'

Responding, 'As you say, lord,' to Sirivaḍḍha the householder, the man went to Venerable Ānanda and, on arrival, having bowed down to him, sat to one side. As he was sitting there he said, 'Venerable sir, Sirivaḍḍha the householder is diseased, in pain, severely ill. He pays homage with his head to your feet.' Then he said, 'It would be good if Venerable Ānanda would visit Sirivaḍḍha's home, out of sympathy for him.'

Venerable Ānanda consented with silence.

Then Venerable Ānanda—having adjusted his under robe and carrying his bowl & outer robe—went to the home of Sirivaḍḍha the householder. On arrival, he sat down on a seat made ready and said to Sirivaḍḍha the householder: 'I hope you are getting better, householder. I hope you are comfortable. I hope that your pains are lessening and not increasing. I hope that there are signs of their lessening, and not of their increasing.'

[Sirivaḍḍha:] 'I'm not getting better, venerable sir. I'm not comfortable. My extreme pains are increasing, not lessening. There are signs of their increasing, and not of their lessening.

[Venerable Ānanda:] 'Then, householder, you should train yourself: 'I will remain focused on the body in & of itself—ardent, alert, & mindful—subduing greed & distress with reference to the world. I will remain focused on feelings in & of themselves—ardent, alert, & mindful—subduing greed & distress with reference to the world. I will remain focused on the mind in & of itself—ardent, alert, & mindful—subduing greed & distress with reference to the world. I will remain focused on mental qualities in & of themselves—ardent, alert, & mindful—subduing greed & distress with reference to the world.' That's how you should train yourself.'

'Venerable sir, these four establishings of mindfulness are found in me, and I am in conformity with these qualities. I remain focused on the body in & of itself—ardent, alert, & mindful—subduing greed & distress with reference to the world. I remain focused on feelings in & of themselves… the mind in & of itself… mental qualities in & of themselves—ardent, alert, & mindful—subduing greed & distress with reference to the world.

'And as for the five lower fetters taught by the Blessed One, I don't see any of them unabandoned in me.'

'It's a gain for you, householder, a great gain. You have declared the fruit of non-return.'